Add a page on parallel and async tools. (#323)
UCL-ARC/python-tooling: docs/pages/parallel-async.md

---
title: Parallel and asynchronous processing
layout: default
---

> Python has a good ecosystem of libraries for multiprocessing (threads and GPU
> parallelisation), as well as asynchronous processing. Here, we list those that
> we've found to be useful, particularly for research applications and previous
> ARC projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python has a good ecosystem of libraries for parallelising the processing of tasks,
as well as asynchronous processing. While Python has built-in support for multithreading via 
[the `threading` module in the standard library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/threading.html)
the _global interpreter lock_ (GIL) [currently](https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/) 
means that only one thread can execute Python code at a time. Parallelisation in Python 
therefore typically either is _process-based_ with code parallelised across multiple Python 
processes each with their own interpreter (and GIL) or makes use of tools which run the 
tasks to be parallelised outside of the Python interpreter, using for example Python 
wrappers around external code which uses thread-based parallelism. For the latter case,
some tools use code generation and just-in-time compilation to allow writing code in a 
Python like syntax while still supporting native thread based parallelism. Increasingly there
is also support for parallelising operations on accelerator devices such as graphics 
processing units.
 
Here, we list Python tools that offer support for parallelisation that
we've found to be useful, particularly for research applications and previous
ARC projects.
```

I think it might be worth adding some comment about `threading` / support for thread-based parallelism in Python as it might otherwise seem odd why we don't recommend using the `threading` module for someone who is not familiar with GIL (which is technically a CPython implementation detail so some of my edits above should say CPython instead of Python but I assumed we don't want to go down this whole different rabbit hole if trying to keep things relatively approachable for beginners). I suspect my edits above probably have too much technical detail and might be better in a comment after the actual recommendations, but I think it is worth mentioning the two main approaces to parallelism and why typically we use process based parallelism rather than threads (which would be the default in most other languages).

Author: Should we put threading in the table as :red_circle: ?

Reviewer: Yeah that could work as a more succinct way of getting across the same point

Author: [1f8f261](https://github.com/UCL-ARC/python-tooling/pull/323/commits/1f8f26132ef85eee197cbc0fa646cb8a91d329b2)

> parallelisation), as well as asynchronous processing. Here, we list those that
> we've found to be useful, particularly for research applications and previous
> ARC projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
parallelisation), as well as asynchronous processing.
```
This is just a repeat of the whole purpose of the package, so worth dropping?

Author: Less words is less words 👍

🟠 tools in the following may be preferred over 🟢, if there are external
reasons to use a specific interface or parallelisation scheme. Possibly due to
the nature of the research problem, the high-performance computing resources
available or simply due to pre-existing code using a library like [pandas].

| Name              | Short description                                                                                                                                                                                            | 🚦  |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :-: |

> | [multiprocess]    | A fork of [multiprocessing] which uses `dill` instead of `pickle` to allow serializing wider range of object types including nested / anonymous functions. We've found this rather more simple to work with. | 🟢  |

Reviewer 3: ❤️ `multiprocess`

> | [multiprocess]    | A fork of [multiprocessing] which uses `dill` instead of `pickle` to allow serializing wider range of object types including nested / anonymous functions. We've found this rather more simple to work with. | 🟢  |

Reviewer 2: More simple to work with than what?

Author: Than multiprocessing. The subject of the previous sentence.

Author: Could just drop the second sentence. Is it clearer that way?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [multiprocess]    | A fork of [multiprocessing] which uses `dill` instead of `pickle` to allow serializing wider range of object types including nested / anonymous functions. We've found this easier to use than `multiprocessing`. | 🟢  |
```

| [multiprocessing] | The standard library module for distributing tasks across multiple processes                                                                                                                                 | 🟠  |

> | [Cython]          | Has [support for OpenMP based parallelism](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/parallelism.html)                                                                                           | 🟠  |
> | [mpi4py]          | support for MPI based parallelism                                                                                                                                                                            | 🟠  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Cython]          | Has [support for OpenMP based parallelism](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/parallelism.html)                                                                                           | 🟠  |
| [mpi4py]          | Support for _message passing interface_ (MPI) based parallelism                                                                                                                                              | 🟠  |
```
Changing case to be consistent with other rows + think its worth expanding MPI acronym as might not be familiar to some

---
title: Parallel and asynchronous processing
layout: default
---

# Parallel and asynchronous processing

Python has a good ecosystem of libraries for parallelising the processing of tasks,
as well as asynchronous processing.

Parallelisation in Python is typically _process-based_ with code parallelised
across multiple Python processes each with their own interpreter or makes use of
tools which run the tasks to be parallelised outside of the Python interpreter,
using for example Python wrappers around external code which uses thread-based

> parallelism.

Author: @matt-graham 

Here ☝️  (and l30 👇 ) is what I settled on, but I don't go into detail about the GIL. Do you think we need a `<details>` for the rest?

> Even if/when PEP0703 gets fully implemented the GIL will be optional but not removed so a lot of the mentioned details will still be relevant. I think having some explanatory comments is useful as while we want to keep thing simple for users, wanting to exploit parallelism / asynchronicity is a relatively advanced use case, and is inherently a complex topic and I think trying to hide away the complexity doesn't necessarily help. Putting some extra detail in a `<details>` block I think would be a good approach.

Reviewer: Thanks @samcunliffe for the updates - the extra detail in the intro paragraph plus the inclusion of `threading` module in 🚦 table with a reference to GIL there is I think works well, so no need for a `<details>` tag.

## Compiler-based parallelism

| Name     | Short description                                                                                                                                                       | 🚦  |
| -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-: |
| [Cython] | Has [support for OpenMP based parallelism](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/parallelism.html)                                                      | 🟠  |
| [numba]  | [Support for parallelism via `jit(parallel=True)`](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/user/parallel.html).                                                       | 🟠  |
| [jax]    | [Support for parallelising NumPy / scientific computing like operations using functional transforms](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax-101/06-parallelism.html). | 🟠  |

<!-- URLs for more a readable tables and text above 👆 -->

> [multiprocess]: https://multiprocess.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[multiprocess]: https://multiprocess.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
```

Author: 😱
